Added documentation for Tessera migration tool (#65)
ConsenSys/doc.orion: docs/Tutorials/Migrating-to-Tessera.md

---
title: Migrating to Tessera
description: Migrate your Orion configuration and data to Tessera.
---

# Migrating to Tessera

## Migration Process

A utility is included in Tessera which enables migration of an Orion config
file and database to a Tessera config file and database.

A full migration workflow would be as follows:

1. Download or build the migration utility
1. Shut down the Orion and Hyperledger Besu nodes
1. Perform the config and database migration

> 1. Start Tessera and Hyperledger Besu nodes with the new config and database files

Reviewer: the config for Besu doesn't change at all, but not sure how to make that clear in a concise way

Author: attempted a resolution

> 1. Start Tessera and Hyperledger Besu nodes with the new config and database files

Reviewer 2: I'm not sure there's really a requirement to start Tessera before Besu but if there's one, maybe:
```suggestion
1. Start Tessera with the new config and database files
1. Start Hyperledger Besu nodes
```

## Build Migration Utility

The utility can be built from the [Tessera repository](https://github.com/ConsenSys/tessera/)

1. First clone the Tessera repostory:

`git clone https://github.com/ConsenSys/tessera`

1. Navigate to the orion-to-tessera migration utility directory:

`cd migration/orion-to-tessera/`

1. Build the migration utility using gradle:

> `gradle clean build`

Reviewer: did this work for you? I was still building it from the tessera dir

Reviewer 2: Yes building from the subdir works for me too.

Author: It did work for me at one point - and this follows the instructions on the commit, but after all my problems building on the M1 arch I've asked @NicolasMassart to help test!

Reviewer 2: If you use the `gradle` installed on your computer, yes it works. If you don't have gradle, it requires that you use the wrapper with `./gradlew` from the root. This is probably what we should require for users.
The best of course would be that they don't have to build, but simply use binaries on a JRE or in a Docker image => explaining the build from source is maybe not targeted to the audience of this migration tool.

Anyway, the content of this doc seems to imply that you ran `gradle installDist` and not `gradle build` as you then use `./bin/migrate` directly which is only available in the `tessera/migration/orion-to-tessera/build/install/migrate` dir. (otherwise would require to untar the dist from `tessera/migration/orion-to-tessera/build/distribution/`.)

## Verify Installation

Verify the installation by running the migration utility with the `--help` flag.

=== "Request"

    ```bash
    ./bin/migrate --help
    ```

=== "Result"

    ```bash
    Missing required options: 'orionconfig=Orion config file',
    'outputfile=<outputFile>', 'tessera.jdbc.user=<username>',
    'tessera.jdbc.password=<password>', 'tessera.jdbc.url=<url>'

    Usage: <main class> -f=Orion config file -o=<outputFile>
    tessera.jdbc.password=<password> tessera.jdbc.url=<url>
    tessera.jdbc.user=<username>

    -f, orionfile, orionconfig=Orion config file
        Orion config file
    -o, outputfile=<outputFile>
        Output Tessera config file
        tessera.jdbc.password=<password>
        Target Tessera DB password
        tessera.jdbc.url=<url>
        Target Tessera DB JDBC connection string
        tessera.jdbc.user=<username>
        Target Tessera DB username
    ```
## Run Migration

By default Tessera uses an H2 database, however alternative databases can be configured.
Refer to the following [SQL Data Definition Language files](https://github.com/consensys/tessera/tree/master/ddls/create-table)

> for help with defining with other databases.

Reviewer: for help with other databases.

Author: changed

!!! warning
    If migrating from an SQL database to Tessera then the JDBC driver must be
    added to the `CLASSPATH` environment variable and added to
    the start script at `~/bin/migrate.bash`

1. Stop your Besu and Orion nodes.

1. Begin the migration by running `migrate` with all required options.
Substitute `main class`, `Orion config file`, `outputFile`, `password`, `url` and `username` with your own values.

=== "Request"

    ```bash
    <main class> -f <Orion config file> -o <outputFile> tessera.jdbc.password <password> tessera.jdbc.url <url> tessera.jdbc.user <username>
    ```

=== "Example"

    ```bash
    ~/workspace/tessera/migration/orion-to-tessera/build/install/migrate/bin/migrate -f ~/workspace/orion/orion.conf -o=~/workspace/tessera/tessera-migrated.conf tessera.jdbc.password password tessera.jdbc.url jdbc:h2:./workdir/tessera/tessera1 tessera.jdbc.user username
    ```

=== "Result"

    ```
    === Migration report ===
    Migrated 2156 of 2156 transactions
    Migrated 56 of 56 privacy groups
    ```

> 1. On a successful migration, the count of transactions and privacy groups migrated will be output.

Reviewer: s/will be output/will match expected values

Author: added

1. Start Besu and Tessera using the new Tessera config file and database.

> 1. Verify the state using `priv_debugGetStateRoot` and `priv_getTransactionCount`.

Reviewer: if you want to use these to verify state, ideally you've already run these calls against the orion before you shut it down. So maybe add an extra step for that

Author: added

---
title: Migrating to Tessera
description: Migrate your Orion configuration and data to Tessera.
---

# Migrating to Tessera

## Migration Process

A utility is included in Tessera which enables migration of an Orion config
file and database to a Tessera config file and database. No changes are required to the config of Besu itself to migrate.

A full migration workflow would be as follows:

1. Download or build the migration utility
1. Shut down the Orion and Hyperledger Besu nodes
1. Perform the config and database migration
1. Start Tessera with the new config and database files
1. Start Hyperledger Besu nodes

## Build Migration Utility

The utility can be built from the [Tessera repository](https://github.com/ConsenSys/tessera/)

1. First clone the Tessera repostory:

`git clone https://github.com/ConsenSys/tessera`

> 1. Navigate to the project root directory:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Navigate to the project root directory:
```

`cd tessera`

> 1. Build the migration utility using gradle:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Build the migration utility with the Gradle wrapper `gradlew`:
```

> `./gradlew clean migration:orion-to-tessera:installDist -x test`

Reviewer 3: I have Java JDK v15 and this did not work with the default gradle v6.0.1, but did work when I changed it to v6.3 in the gradle wrapper properties file.

## Download Migration Utility

Or download the migration utility binaries, which are available at the following [download link](to be added).

## Verify Installation

Verify the installation by running the migration utility with the `--help` flag.

=== "Request"

    ```bash
    ./tessera/migration/orion-to-tessera/build/install/migrate --help
    ```

=== "Result"

    ```bash
    ./bin/migrate --help
    Usage: orion-to-tessera/bin/migrate [-h] -f=Orion config file -o=<outputFile>
                                    tessera.jdbc.password=<password> tessera.
                                    jdbc.url=<url> tessera.jdbc.user=<username>
    -f, orionfile, orionconfig=Orion config file
                       Orion config file
    -h, help, --help   Print this message
    -o, outputfile=<outputFile>
                       Output Tessera config file
        tessera.jdbc.password=<password>
                       Target Tessera DB password
        tessera.jdbc.url=<url>
                       Target Tessera DB JDBC connection string
        tessera.jdbc.user=<username>
                       Target Tessera DB username
    ```

> ## Migrate

Reviewer 3: Add blank line above this header to fix markdownlint error.

By default Tessera uses an H2 database, however alternative databases can be configured.
Refer to the following [SQL Data Definition Language files](https://github.com/consensys/tessera/tree/master/ddls/create-table)
for help with other databases.

!!! warning
    If migrating from an SQL database to Tessera then the JDBC driver must be
    added to the `CLASSPATH` environment variable and added to
    the start script at `./bin/migrate`

!!! note
    Password protected keys are renamed to `.orion` on migration and added to the Tessera config.

> 1. Verify the state on your Besu and Orion network using `priv_debugGetStateRoot` and `priv_getTransactionCount`.

Reviewer 3: I suggest removing the list numbers from this section and adding code block examples or link to examples on each item.

1. Stop your Besu and Orion nodes.

1. Begin the migration by running `migrate` with all required options.
Substitute `Orion config file`, `outputFile`, `password`, `url` and `username` with your own values.

=== "Request"

    ```bash
    ./bin/migrate -f <Orion config file> -o <outputFile> tessera.jdbc.password <password> tessera.jdbc.url <url> tessera.jdbc.user <username>
    ```

=== "Example"

    ```bash
    ./bin/migrate -f "orion.conf" -o="tessera-migrated.conf" tessera.jdbc.password "My Secret Pass" tessera.jdbc.url "jdbc:h2:tessera1" tessera.jdbc.user "user1"
    ```

=== "Result"

    ```
    === Migration report ===
    Migrated 2156 of 2156 transactions
    Migrated 56 of 56 privacy groups
    ```

> 1. On a successful migration, the count of transactions and privacy groups migrated will match expected values.

Reviewer 3: Add blank line above this to fix markdownlint error.

A utility is included in Tessera which enables migration of an Orion config
file and database to a Tessera config file and database. No changes are required to the config of Besu itself to migrate.

A full migration workflow would be as follows:

1. Download or build the migration utility
1. Shut down the Orion and Hyperledger Besu nodes
1. Perform the config and database migration
1. Start Tessera and Hyperledger Besu nodes with the new config and database files

## Build Migration Utility

The utility can be built from the [Tessera repository](https://github.com/ConsenSys/tessera/)

1. First clone the Tessera repostory:

`git clone https://github.com/ConsenSys/tessera`

1. Navigate to the orion-to-tessera migration utility directory:

`cd migration/orion-to-tessera/`

1. Build the migration utility using gradle:

`gradle clean build`

## Download Migration Utility

Or download the migration utility binaries, which are available at the following [download link](to be added).

## Verify Installation

Verify the installation by running the migration utility with the `--help` flag.

=== "Request"

    ```bash
    ./bin/migrate --help
    ```

=== "Result"

    ```bash

>     Missing required options: 'orionconfig=Orion config file',

Reviewer 2: This is not the output of the latest version. Message was fixed and now is:
```
% ./bin/migrate --help
Usage: orion-to-tessera/bin/migrate [-h] -f=Orion config file -o=<outputFile>
                                    tessera.jdbc.password=<password> tessera.
                                    jdbc.url=<url> tessera.jdbc.user=<username>
  -f, orionfile, orionconfig=Orion config file
                     Orion config file
  -h, help, --help   Print this message
  -o, outputfile=<outputFile>
                     Output Tessera config file
      tessera.jdbc.password=<password>
                     Target Tessera DB password
      tessera.jdbc.url=<url>
                     Target Tessera DB JDBC connection string
      tessera.jdbc.user=<username>
                     Target Tessera DB username
```

>     Missing required options: 'orionconfig=Orion config file',

Reviewer 2: This is not the output of the latest version. Message was fixed and now is:
```
% ./bin/migrate --help
Usage: orion-to-tessera/bin/migrate [-h] -f=Orion config file -o=<outputFile>
                                    tessera.jdbc.password=<password> tessera.
                                    jdbc.url=<url> tessera.jdbc.user=<username>
  -f, orionfile, orionconfig=Orion config file
                     Orion config file
  -h, help, --help   Print this message
  -o, outputfile=<outputFile>
                     Output Tessera config file
      tessera.jdbc.password=<password>
                     Target Tessera DB password
      tessera.jdbc.url=<url>
                     Target Tessera DB JDBC connection string
      tessera.jdbc.user=<username>
                     Target Tessera DB username
```

    'outputfile=<outputFile>', 'tessera.jdbc.user=<username>',
    'tessera.jdbc.password=<password>', 'tessera.jdbc.url=<url>'

    Usage: <main class> -f=Orion config file -o=<outputFile>
    tessera.jdbc.password=<password> tessera.jdbc.url=<url>
    tessera.jdbc.user=<username>

    -f, orionfile, orionconfig=Orion config file
        Orion config file
    -o, outputfile=<outputFile>
        Output Tessera config file
        tessera.jdbc.password=<password>
        Target Tessera DB password
        tessera.jdbc.url=<url>
        Target Tessera DB JDBC connection string
        tessera.jdbc.user=<username>
        Target Tessera DB username
    ```
## Run Migration

By default Tessera uses an H2 database, however alternative databases can be configured.
Refer to the following [SQL Data Definition Language files](https://github.com/consensys/tessera/tree/master/ddls/create-table)
for help with other databases.

!!! warning
    If migrating from an SQL database to Tessera then the JDBC driver must be
    added to the `CLASSPATH` environment variable and added to

>     the start script at `~/bin/migrate.bash`

Reviewer 2: Not sure what this script is. If you mean the script we just built it's `./bin/migrate` directly without `.bash`.
Otherwise I don't have the `bin` dir in my home (`~/`)

>     the start script at `~/bin/migrate.bash`

Reviewer 2: Not sure what this script is. If you mean the script we just built it's `./bin/migrate` directly without `.bash`.
Otherwise I don't have the `bin` dir in my home (`~/`)

---
title: Migrating to Tessera
description: Migrate your Orion configuration and data to Tessera.
---

# Migrating to Tessera

## Migration Process

> A utility is included in Tessera which enables migration of an Orion config

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
A utility is included in Tessera which enables migration of an Orion configuration
```

> file and database to a Tessera config file and database. No changes are required to the config of Besu itself to migrate.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
file and database to a Tessera configuration file and database. No changes are required to the Besu configuration file to migrate.
```

A full migration workflow would be as follows:

> 1. Download or build the migration utility

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
1. [Build](#build-migration-utility) or [download](#download-migration-utility) the migration utility.
```

> 1. Shut down the Orion and Hyperledger Besu nodes

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
2. Shut down the Orion and Hyperledger Besu nodes.
```

> 1. Perform the config and database migration

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
3. Perform [configuration and database migration](#migrate).
```

> 1. Start Tessera with the new config and database files

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
4. Start Tessera with the new configuration and database files.
```

> 1. Start Hyperledger Besu nodes

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
5. Start Hyperledger Besu nodes.
```

## Build Migration Utility

> The utility can be built from the [Tessera repository](https://github.com/ConsenSys/tessera/)

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The utility can be built from the [Tessera repository](https://github.com/ConsenSys/tessera/).
```

> 1. First clone the Tessera repostory:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
First, clone the Tessera repository:
```

For the rest of this section, I suggest removing the list numbers and wrapping the terminal commands in bash [code blocks](https://github.com/ConsenSys/doc.common/wiki/MkDocs-And-Custom-Markdown-Guide#including-code-in-the-documentation).

`git clone https://github.com/ConsenSys/tessera`

1. Navigate to the project root directory:

`cd tessera`

1. Build the migration utility using gradle:

> `./gradlew`

Reviewer 2: `./gradlew` alone is is not building if you don't tell it what task to run.
Also if you run `./gradlew clean build` as the equivalent of the previously documented command but with the wrapper, then all tessera will build and test and we only need to build the `orion-to-tessera` module.
Plus it's not going to install the dist, meaning you will end up with compressed archives (tgz and zip) in the `migration/orion-to-tessera/build/distribution` directory so you would need to add instructions to expand them.
To do so, at the root of the project, run `./gradlew clean migration:orion-to-tessera:installDist -x test`
- `./gradlew` uses the wrapper
- `clean` purges all previous build artefacts
-  `migration:orion-to-tessera:` is the module that you want to target and only it
- `installDist` is the build task that will assemble a binary and expand the folders in `migration/orion-to-tessera/build/install/migration/` with `bin` and `lib` subfolders directly ready to run `./bin/migrate`.
- `-x test` will exclude the tests as we only need to build the binaries, not run the whole test suite that takes ages...

Reviewer 3: I have Java JDK v15 and `./gradlew clean migration:orion-to-tessera:installDist -x test` did not work with the default gradle v6.0.1 but it did work after editing `tessera/gradle/wrapper/gradle-wrapper.properties` to use v6.3.

Author: thank you for the example and detail

## Download Migration Utility

Or download the migration utility binaries, which are available at the following [download link](to be added).

## Verify Installation

Verify the installation by running the migration utility with the `--help` flag.

=== "Request"

    ```bash

>     ./tessera/migration/orion-to-tessera/build/install/migrate --help

Reviewer 3: `./tessera/migration/orion-to-tessera/build/install/migrate/bin/migrate` for me

    ```

=== "Result"

    ```bash
    Missing required options: 'orionconfig=Orion config file',
    'outputfile=<outputFile>', 'tessera.jdbc.user=<username>',
    'tessera.jdbc.password=<password>', 'tessera.jdbc.url=<url>'

    Usage: <main class> -f=Orion config file -o=<outputFile>
    tessera.jdbc.password=<password> tessera.jdbc.url=<url>
    tessera.jdbc.user=<username>

    -f, orionfile, orionconfig=Orion config file
        Orion config file
    -o, outputfile=<outputFile>
        Output Tessera config file
        tessera.jdbc.password=<password>
        Target Tessera DB password
        tessera.jdbc.url=<url>
        Target Tessera DB JDBC connection string
        tessera.jdbc.user=<username>
        Target Tessera DB username
    ```

> ## Run Migration

Reviewer 2: Simplify and use sentence case.
```suggestion
## Migrate
```

> By default Tessera uses an H2 database, however alternative databases can be configured.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
By default Tessera uses an H2 database. However, you can configure alternative databases.
```

> Refer to the following [SQL Data Definition Language files](https://github.com/consensys/tessera/tree/master/ddls/create-table)

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Refer to the [SQL Data Definition Language files](https://github.com/consensys/tessera/tree/master/ddls/create-table)
```

for help with other databases.

!!! warning

>     If migrating from an SQL database to Tessera then the JDBC driver must be

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    If migrating from an SQL database to Tessera, you must add the JDBC driver
```

>     added to the `CLASSPATH` environment variable and added to

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    to the `CLASSPATH` environment variable and
```

>     the start script at `tessera/migration/orion-to-tessera/build/install/migrate`

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    the start script at `tessera/migration/orion-to-tessera/build/install/migrate`.
```

!!! note

>     Password protected keys are renamed to `.orion` on migration and added to the Tessera config.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    Password protected keys are renamed to `.orion` on migration and added to the Tessera configuration file.
```

"config" should be changed to "configuration" when not in backticks throughout the doc.

> 1. Verify the state on your Besu and Orion network using `priv_debugGetStateRoot` and `priv_getTransactionCount`.

Reviewer 2: could you add links to the doc for these methods?
What result should we expect form them?

Author: blocked by hyperledger/besu-docs/issues/499

1. Stop your Besu and Orion nodes.

1. Begin the migration by running `migrate` with all required options.

> Substitute `main class`, `Orion config file`, `outputFile`, `password`, `url` and `username` with your own values.

Reviewer 2: should `main class` be indicated here or simply `migrate`? See also in the next lines where the command template is displayed.

=== "Request"

    ```bash

>     <main class> -f <Orion config file> -o <outputFile> tessera.jdbc.password <password> tessera.jdbc.url <url> tessera.jdbc.user <username>

Reviewer 2: To match the command we used previously for `--help`
```suggestion
    ./bin/migrate -f <Orion config file> -o <outputFile> tessera.jdbc.password <password> tessera.jdbc.url <url> tessera.jdbc.user <username>
```

    ```

=== "Example"

    ```bash

>     ~/workspace/tessera/migration/orion-to-tessera/build/install/migrate/bin/migrate -f ~/workspace/orion/orion.conf -o=~/workspace/tessera/tessera-migrated.conf tessera.jdbc.password password tessera.jdbc.url jdbc:h2:./workdir/tessera/tessera1 tessera.jdbc.user username

Reviewer 2: Use simpler paths. Just consider users are already in the right `build/install/migrate/` directory as you asked to run `./bin/migrate --help` previously.
Remove ambiguity on the option values (using the option name as a value for an example is not clear).
Don't hesitate to use `"` around values. It's not always necessary if there's no spaces in the value, but it's safer and users who don't know will have something that always works.

```suggestion
    ./bin/migrate -f "orion.conf" -o="tessera-migrated.conf" tessera.jdbc.password "My Secret Pass" tessera.jdbc.url "jdbc:h2:tessera1" tessera.jdbc.user "user1"
```

    ```

=== "Result"

    ```
    === Migration report ===
    Migrated 2156 of 2156 transactions
    Migrated 56 of 56 privacy groups
    ```
1. On a successful migration, the count of transactions and privacy groups migrated will match expected values.

1. Start Besu and Tessera using the new Tessera config file and database.

> 1. Verify the state on your Besu and Tessera nodes using `priv_debugGetStateRoot` and `priv_getTransactionCount`, it should be identical to the results from earlier.

Reviewer 2: Same comment here about links to the methods.
Also instead of writing "results from earlier", clearly link to the previous section. You may need to split the `## Run migration` (or `##Migrate`) with sub-headers for that. Maybe `### Stop services`, `### Run migration` and `## Restart services` or alike.

### Options

You must specify the following options in order to run the migration tool:

> `main class`= Migration tool location

Reviewer 2: I think it's not required and it will always be `migration`...and if not always the same, it should...
